# Job Aid 1—Scoping Processes

This job aid describes considerations for the major project scoping decisions that are used to define the overall project scope.

## Watershed Study Extent

The Future of Flood Risk Data (FFRD) project will typically be scoped using Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC)-4 watersheds as previously established in the national watershed boundary dataset, but special considerations may apply. The scoping documentation will clearly describe all rational related to any adjustments to the watershed study extent and these adjustments should be vetted with FFRD program leadership.

An FFRD specific geospatial polygon will be created for the project, be based on the full resolution project digital elevation model (DEM), and follow FFRD spatial projection standards.

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> study-area-polygon**

## Hydraulic Modeling Unit Delineation

FFRD studies at the HUC-4 level are generally too large to efficiently develop and calibrate two-dimensional (2D) hydraulic models with sufficient detail to meet the study objectives. Therefore, the study basin is broken out into multiple hydraulic model units that define the extents for separate 2D hydraulic models. Considerations for hydraulic model unit delineation for FFRD studies are provided below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> hydraulic-model-units

### Basin Size

The FFRD program uses HUC-4 boundaries to define the watershed study area. Developing full basin 2D hydraulic models at the HUC-4 scale following the procedures in this document is generally deemed impractical using the computing capability available with current technology. Therefore, smaller hydraulic modeling units will be defined as part of FFRD scoping process.

Subbasins or model units with drainage areas of 500 to 1,000 square miles are practical for FFRD hydraulic modeling. The HUC-8 level boundaries provide a rough guide for subbasin delineation. The technical lead reviews the HUC-8 boundaries and adjusts to find more natural breaks from a hydraulic modeling perspective. There are various reasons the HUC-8 boundaries may be adjusted, specifically consideration is given to location of significant dams, stream gages, or population centers.

### Hydrologic Model Boundaries

The boundaries will also align with hydrologic model boundaries, therefore subbasins of the FFRD hydrologic models must be considered. It is best practice for hydraulic model unit boundaries to align with hydrologic model boundaries, such that hydrologic model output can be more seamlessly used as an input boundary condition for the hydraulic model. Although hydrologic sub-basin boundaries may be edited during the FFRD model development process, this is an important planning consideration.

Hydrologic model boundaries and catchments are commonly delineated in a coarser resolution DEM than is generally used for hydraulic modeling. This can result in differences in watershed delineation, which should be resolved for FFRD projects so that the boundaries match.

### Digital Elevation Model Alignment

Hydraulic model unit boundaries should align with the full resolution DEM for the project. Effort should be made to identify structures, such as culverts and other hydro-connecting features, which can significantly alter the watershed delineation. Local knowledge and judgment may be required for a satisfactory watershed delineation, for example when there are interbasin canals or in watersheds which are very flat or contain significant underground drainage systems.

### Stream Gages

Stream gage data is critical to successfully developing the runoff, conveyance, and backwater parameters. These gages also serve as the primary means of evaluating model accuracy by providing observed data, which modeled results can be compared with. Therefore, model unit boundaries should generally be located away from important stream gage locations to avoid model results at gage locations from being unduly sensitive to boundary condition assumptions. Locating model unit boundaries away from important stream gages allows for model results and calibration metrics to be independent of boundary conditions.

If model unit boundaries must be located near stream gages for reasons that cannot be avoided, these gage locations can still be useful for informing boundary condition assumptions and ensuring accurate transition between upstream and downstream model units. In this case, it may be appropriate to use the gage’s published stage-discharge rating curve (which may need to be extended to include all flows of interest, even infrequent and extreme flows) as a downstream boundary condition in the hydraulic model.

### Levees

Model unit boundaries should generally not intersect levee alignments as this splitting of the levee limits the ability to evaluate the levee’s behavior as a system. There may be occasional cases for extremely long levees where model unit boundaries must split the levee. In this case, careful consideration is required to avoid likely breach and overtopping locations. If a levee breach or overtopping occurs at the upstream end of the levee, separating the leveed area into multiple model units makes it difficult for leveed area inundation to flow through the artificial model unit boundary. The same effect can occur even if the breach/overtopping occurs near the downstream end of the levee. Modelers and team leads should give careful consideration to representation of inundation in areas where levees are adjacent to or split a levee system.

### Backwater Effects and River Confluences

Model unit boundary selection should consider whether a given area is subject to significant backwater effects, which can significantly complicate boundary condition assumptions. River confluences are a common location where backwater impacts can be significant and for this reason, model unit boundaries should avoid major river confluence areas.

Backwater impacts can be due to many factors other than river confluences. River control structures (such as locks and dams) can produce significant backwater effects, as can valley-wide constructions which limit the conveyance of a river valley. It may not be practicable to avoid all backwater impacts when selecting model unit boundaries. In these cases, boundary condition assumptions must account for these backwater influences. One way to accomplish this is to use a stage-discharge rating curve developed to account for backwater influence as the boundary condition. These rating curves can be developed from downstream model unit results and therefore require additional coordination between model units.

The scoped model unit polygons do not overlap, and the edges will match at all boundaries. Note that the extent of the hydraulic models developed for each model unit will commonly extend beyond the downstream boundary in order to avoid errors associated with boundary condition assumptions (more guidance included in SOP Volume II, Section 8).

### Urban Areas

Urban areas should be contained within a single hydraulic model unit whenever possible.

### Dams

When possible, hydraulic model unit boundaries should not be located close to significant dams for the following reasons:

- To minimize complex linking with other models. The linkages within the FFRD system of models can be simplified when each dam is internal to a single hydraulic model unit.

- To better utilize available observed data for calibration. Dams often have associated flow and stage observed data that is best utilized for model calibration if boundary condition assumptions are remote from the observed data.

- To limit impacts to dam breach scenarios. HEC-RAS hydraulic breach scenarios are impacted by the reservoir pool level and the downstream tailwater can rapidly rise during a breach event. The local hydrodynamics associated with a breach are more easily modeled when contained within a single model unit with minimal interactions with separate models.

### Delineation Process

Considering factors included in the section, a geospatial polygon will be developed and coordinated with the larger scoping team to ensure workability and to identify any potential modeling issues. When a final delineation is made, it will be uploaded to the directory location listed in Section [1.2](#hydraulic-modeling-unit-delineation) as a key scoping deliverable.

## Uncalibrated Hydrologic Model

A complete uncalibrated hydrologic model will be developed as part of the scoping phase, in advance of development of other models during the calibration phase. This model will fully define the subbasins. Reaches and reservoir elements are delineated during the scoping phase, which is important baseline information for development of the name table and model linking register.

The guidance for development of the HEC-HMS model and the configuration for elements for FFRD studies is included in Volume II of the SOP.

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> uncalibrated-hydrologic-model**

## Mesh Development Criteria for Hydraulic Model

The scope for the development of hydraulic 2D meshes for the FFRD project is guided by specific layers developed during the scoping phase. The criteria for developing each of the layers is shown in Volume II, Section 4.3 of the SOP. All areas not included in these 3 layers will be part of the *background mesh* in FFRD models.

- <u>Urban Areas</u>: Polygons should be sourced directly from the U.S. Census and provided in a geospatial format to match FFRD projection standards.

- <u>Key Streams</u>: Key streamlines will be selected manually by following the criterial in the SOP. This geospatial layer that defines a portion of the scope of the modeling effort may be based on the existing National Hydrography Dataset, which may not align perfectly with stream centerlines based on the project DEM. This scoping layer will be used together with the Elevation Derived Hydrography (based on project DEM) stream layer during the modeling development process (Calibration Phase).

- <u>Other Streams</u>: Developed manually based on criteria in the SOP. Similar use caveats as the key stream layer described above.

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> mesh-development-criteria**

## Name Table

The comprehensive name table will include all planned element names for all models. This is aided by the HEC-HMS subbasins, reaches, and reservoir elements that are built into the uncalibrated base model during the scoping and data preparation phase. Appendix C of SOP Volume II includes a template document with all necessary attributes. The names will all follow the conventions in Job Aid 06, *Standard Naming Conventions*.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> name-table

## Model Linking Register

The comprehensive model linking register table will include all planned connections for all models. There will be a separate table for historic event scenarios and for synthetic event scenarios (where no historic observation data is leveraged for inputs). A template document in included in Appendix C and includes all necessary attributes. The names will all follow the conventions in Job Aid 06, *Standard Naming Conventions*.

Optionally, a graphical version of the linking tables may be developed to support team communication and understanding of the data linkages.

Special planning for reservoir components linkages is highly recommended during the scoping phase. It may be necessary to link separate components of the dam to separate outflow timeseries independently (for example, one timeseries for conduit releases, another for spillway flows, and a third for dam overtopping flows).

Note that the purpose of the model linking register is to develop a clear plan during scoping and improve team communication with regards to model linking throughout the project. This file is not directly used in cloud compute for applying the linkages. The process for ensuring accurate linkages are applied within cloud-compute events is described separately.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> model-linking-register

## Dam Data

Dam data refinement and dam data collection are mentioned in sections below but are not core scoping activities.

### Dam Data Refinement

The National Inventory of Dams (NID) will be leveraged as the official dam inventory source for FFRD studies. Prior to or during the scoping phase, the NID will undergo a data refinement process to ensure sufficient accuracy and completeness of the data for the entire study basin with a focus on ensuring data is of adequate quality to make dam scoping decisions for the FFRD study. The guidelines and procedures for this dam data refinement process are under development as of December 2025.

### Dam Data Collection

Efforts to obtain additional dam information for the purposes of FFRD modeling, such as the physical structure data, reservoir storage information, risk assessment information, or operation manuals will be targeted to specific dams and based on the Dam Model Scoping Table developed according to the guidelines below. Processes for obtaining these datasets are provided in Job Aid 02, *Data Preparation Processes*.

## Dam Modeling Scope Selection

During the scoping phase, the model treatment for each dam in the basin will be clearly specified in the ***Dam Scoping Table***, which provides an authoritative summary of the planned modeling approach for each dam. Appendix C of SOP Volume II contains a template dam scoping table.

The Dam Scoping Table will include a listing for every dam listed in the NID. The modeling approach in terms of operations modeling, hydrologic modeling, hydraulic modeling, breaching, and treatment of initial pool levels for synthetic events will be specifically defined in the table.

There are many combinations by which to model a dam across FFRD models, and dam scoping decisions must be made with consideration for the function of the full system of models. Guidelines for scoping the treatment of each dam within each component model are provided in the sections below, which balance modeling efficiency, accuracy, and the magnitude of impact to overall flood characteristics among other factors.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> dam-scoping-table

### Reservoir Operations Model Scope Selection Guidelines

Major reservoirs or reservoir systems that are actively operated for a downstream constraint should be considered for possible inclusion in an FFRD reservoir operations model. If a dam operates as part of a system only in rare cases, as a small system of dams, or other areas of uncertain or complicated operations scoping decisions will require engineering judgement. Reservoirs without a controlled outlet, or those that do not operate for a downstream constraint or in coordination with a system of other reservoirs should not be included. Reservoirs without controlled outlets should only be modeled in the reservoir operations model if their state (i.e., pool elevation, storage, outflows, etc.) is required to determine the operations at another facility being modeled. Reservoir operations that can be reasonably represented with simplified approaches in either the hydrologic or hydraulic model should not be scoped for inclusion in the reservoir operations model for the FFRD project.

Each dam selected for inclusion in the reservoir operations model will be documented in the Dam Scoping Table, and high-level modeling approach will be specified according to the attributes listed in the tables below.

Table 1. Reservoir Operations Model Scoping Options

| Include in Reservoir Operations Model (Y/N)? |
|----------------------------------------------|
| No                                           |
| Yes, Include in HEC-ResSim                   |

Table 2. Scoping Options for Reservoir Operations

| Number of Unique Outflow Features? ("ResSim Dams") |
|:--------------------------------------------------:|
|                        N/A                         |
|                         1                          |
|                         2                          |
|                         3                          |
|                        \>3                         |

### Hydrologic Model Scope Selection Guidelines

HEC-HMS reservoir elements should be included for dams that are expected to significantly impact flood characteristics at the basin scale, with special consideration for dams that impact the ability to match downstream observed gage data for flood events. The availability of physical dam data and operational data to support modeling inputs may be considered when scoping the hydrologic modeling approach for individual dams. Watershed size, reservoir storage, operation characteristics, and river slope are among the factors in the evaluation of impact of individual dams. As a general guideline, dams with over 10,000 acre-feet in storage and a flood control mission are candidates for inclusion as HEC-HMS reservoir elements.

For dams selected for inclusion as reservoir elements in the hydrologic model, the specific modeling method for outflows will also be included in the Dam Scoping Table. Various methods are available depending on the reservoir characteristics. As reservoirs and their operations increase in size and complexity, additional modeling techniques are required. These techniques are described below in Table 3.

During the Calibration Phase of the project, it is acceptable to use the Specified Release routing method with observed outflows from the reservoir. This ensures that downstream subbasins can be calibrated without the added uncertainty of reservoir routing. When observed specified releases are leveraged for the Calibration Phase, the simplest reservoir routing method necessary should be chosen for use during the Conformance Phase and Production Phase models.

Simple reservoir operations include one to one storage and discharge relationships, uncontrolled outlets, and ungated spillways. Typically, if the outlets and spillways have simple rating curves not dependent on inflow or seasonality, the dam can be modeled with simple procedures in HEC-HMS. A single outflow curve is the simplest hydraulic routing method available in HEC-HMS. If outlets are gated or controlled, simple operations can still be used by analyzing observed data and estimating an average outflow for a given elevation or storage condition. For more complex reservoir operations, modelers typically rely on HEC-ResSim to model operating schedules, rules, and downstream constraints, however rule-based operations in HEC-HMS can serve as a close approximation.

Table 3. Hydrologic Model Dam Treatment for Historic Events

| Hydrologic Modeling Treatment – Historic Events |
|-------------------------------------------------|
| Reservoir Element—Rule-Based Operations         |
| Reservoir Element—Outflow Structures            |
| Reservoir Element—Outflow Curve                 |
| Reservoir Element—Specified Release             |
| No Reservoir Routing Element                    |

### Hydraulic Model Scope Selection Guidelines

In the hydraulic model, various treatments and levels of detail are available depending on the reservoir characteristics. As reservoirs and their operations increase in size and complexity, more detailed modeling techniques are needed to account for the impact of dam operations, initial pool levels, and the possibility of breach events to accurately characterize flood risk. The selection of the specific hydraulic modeling treatment for each dam must occur in coordination with selected techniques for the hydrologic and reservoir operations models with the goal of establishing a cohesive plan for the full system of models. Tables 4 and 5 show the options for hydraulic modeling techniques and methods. Section 8 of the SOP includes specific modeling techniques for each type of model treatment.

Table 4. Hydrologic Model Dam Treatment for Synthetic Events

| Synthetic Event Hydrologic Modeling Treatment |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| Reservoir Element—Rule-Based Operations       |
| Reservoir Element—Outflow Structures          |
| Reservoir Element—Outflow Curve               |
| Reservoir Element—Specified Release           |
| No Reservoir Routing Element                  |

Table 5. Hydraulic Model Dam Modeling Treatment

| Hydraulic Modeling Treatment                            |
|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Type A—Operation Modeled outside of Hydraulic Model\*   |
| Type B—Operation Modeled by Hydraulic Model\*           |
| Type C—Simplified Outflows Modeled by Hydraulic Model\* |
| Type D—Basic Representation in Hydraulic Model          |
| Type E—Not Modeled                                      |

\*Hydraulic Model Treatment can support breach events

The key consideration for hydraulic model treatment selection is to ensure the effects of all dams that have a significant impact on flood risk characteristics by way of providing flood storage or inducing excess flooding if breaches are representing by the model. All dams that meet these criteria shall be scoped to receive Type A, B, or C treatment, which account for reservoir storage and are capable of assessing the impacts of breach events.

A threshold of 2,500 acre-feet of storage can be considered a guideline for inclusion of dams for apply Type A, B, or C treatments. The volume of storage relative to drainage area for the dam, hazard classification, and immediate proximity to population centers may also be considered in the selection of hydraulic model treatment.

Type A treatment will be chosen for dams that have been selected for inclusion in either the reservoir operations model or for advanced outflow modeling method in the hydrologic model.

Type B treatment will be chosen for dams when the hydraulic model will provide superior outflow simulation compared to the chosen methods for hydrologic model, and physical dam information and operational information is available to support a more detailed simulation within the hydraulic model.

Type C treatment will be chosen for dams when the hydraulic model will provide superior outflow simulation compared to the chosen methods for hydrologic model, but physical and operational data is limited, and outflow features must be approximated.

Type D treatment will be chosen for dams that do not meet the threshold for Type A, B, or C treatments.

Type E treatment is reserved for dams that are deemed to be insignificant. This determination may be related to inability to confirm a dam exists, very small dams, partially breached dams, or other factors determined by professional judgement.

Table 6. Initial Pool Elevation

| Include Hydraulic Initial Pool Elevation (Initial Condition \[IC\] Point)? |
|----|
| Yes |
| No |

IC points must be used in the hydraulic model to simulate events with reservoirs that are not dry at the start of the storm event. All dams selected for Type A, B, or C modeling treatments must include IC points, and all other dams are not required include initial conditions points.

### Dam Breach Model Selection Guidelines

The Dam Scoping Table will include a clear determination of which dams will be allowed to breach in the FFRD stochastic simulations. The guideline for selection of these dams follows the threshold described for selection of hydraulic model treatments, and therefore all dams that are modeled with Type A, B, or C treatments will also be allowed to breach.

Table 7. Breach Modeling of Dams

| Sample Breach |
|---------------|
| Yes           |
| No            |

### Reservoir Initial Pool Elevations for Stochastic Events

The variation in initial reservoir pool elevations at the start of simulated events can be an important factor for flood characterization within the context of the quasi-continuous simulations approach for FFRD. A clear determination of which dams will be simulated with a varied initial pool elevation, will be included in the Dam Scoping Table. The source for the sampled elevations will also be identified.

The available data to support sampling of varied pool elevations is the key consideration regarding this scoping decision. Calibrated period of record modeled simulations from either the reservoir operations or hydrologic models in certain locations may provide a defensible simulated observed record for locations where observed data is not available or reliable.

When no observed or simulated data is available to support sampling, a static water surface for all stochastic events is acceptable but care should be taken to ensure that this assumption does not drive representation of flood characteristics for the basin, and it should be avoided for larger significant dams that may have variable water levels.

Table 8. Options for Initial Pool Elevation for Stochastic Events

| Vary Initial Pool Elevation during Stochastic Events |
|----|
| Yes—Sourced from Reservoir Operations Model Period of Record Simulation Results |
| Yes—Sourced from Hydrologic Model Period of Record Simulation Results |
| Yes—Sourced from Observed Period of Record |
| No—Static Initial Pool for all Events |
| Not Applicable (No IC Point) |

## Levee Data

The National Levee Database (NLD) will be leveraged as the official source of inventory, alignments, and crest profiles of levees for FFRD studies. Prior to the study, the NLD will undergo a data refinement process to ensure sufficient accuracy and completeness of the data for the entire study basin to adequately support the FFRD study. The guidelines and procedures for this levee data refinement process are documented outside of this SOP.

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> levee-data \> nld**

**Files: levee alignment and profile geospatial data**

## Levee Modeling Scope Selection

All levees will be represented in the FFRD hydraulic models (according to guidelines in Job Aid 09, *Levee Representation*) and all levees will be scoped for at least one breach location (as described in Job Aid 11, *Levee Breach Workflows*).

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> levee-modeling-scope**

**Files: levee breach locations (geospatial with attributes)**

## Calibration Scope

A clear plan for the approach to event-based calibration of FFRD models is established during scoping. This plan consists of both establishing stream gage performance metric target prioritization and selecting specific historic events to be used during model calibration efforts.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> project-scoping \> calibration-scope

Files: Gages (geospatial with attributes), Calibration Event Table

### Calibration Gage Category Assignments

The following sections outline how assignment of gages in primary, secondary, and tertiary categories are completed.

#### Calibration Metric Hierarchy

All active stream gages with a significant period of record of observed data are used for calibration of FFRD models. Each of the gages are categorized as either primary, secondary, or tertiary gages to describe the hierarchy for use in model calibration. For example, more rigorous calibration metrics are used for primary gages than for secondary gages. The gages are categorized during the scoping phase ensuring consistency in calibration targets across all FFRD modeling efforts for the basin. The selected gages—with primary, secondary, and tertiary category attributes—are delivered as part of the scoping and data preparation..

Primary gages are typically located on major streams, have plentiful and reliable observed data, and/or are used in reservoir operational decisions. Secondary gages may also be cited similarly as primary gages, however, they may be located on smaller streams and not used when operating flood control reservoirs. In general, one primary and one secondary gage should be located within each hydraulic modeling domain with the remaining gages designated as tertiary. However, this categorization is subjective.

#### Prioritization of Gages

Some modeling units may include numerous stream gages, and while information from all these gages would be incorporated into FFRD models in an ideal scenario, it must be acknowledged that there are constraints of time and funding which limit what refinement can be performed. Prioritization of gages should consider factors such as data availability, potential for flood risk near the gage, and many other factors, such as:

- Location of gages within model unit—At least one primary gage within each model unit, if one exists.

- Gage period of record—Consider:

<!-- -->

- Does observed data cover majority of calibration events?

- Does the data contain significant gaps?

- Do these gaps occur at times of peak flow/stage?

- Do large reservoirs or other control features exist?

- Is this gage used in reservoir operational decisions?

<!-- -->

- Population Center near gages.

- Gage Data Quality—Consider:

<!-- -->

- Is gage data reliable and consistent over the period of record?

- Does the gage provide data at a sufficient time interval, such as 15-minute or hourly data, as opposed to daily data?

- If only annual peak flow data or nearby high-water marks are available, this can still be useful as a peak stage/flow comparison.

<!-- -->

- Nearness to other gages—Redundancy of gages representing similar or overlapping areas should be avoided.

- Spatial Coverage throughout Basin—Ensure coverage throughout the basin, even with observed data of lesser data quality.

- Give consideration to mainstem rivers, major tributaries, then minor tributaries.

- Give consideration to representing both regulated and unregulated areas within the basin.

- Drainage Area Coverage—Assign less priority to areas with small drainages.

- Similarity of Physiographic Features between Nearby Gages (e.g., slope, land-use, land-coverage, soil type, etc.)—Give priority representing the range of conditions existing within the watershed if a modeling unit contains diverse physiographic properties.

#### Exclusion of Gages

There may be scenarios where gage data will not be used. Strong justification is required to support the decision to exclude a stream gage from consideration. Examples may include a stage-only gage lacking a reliable elevation datum, a gage representing a very small drainage area (less than one square mile), or a gage where data was not recorded during the calibration events. For some streams and basins where flows are particularly flashy, daily data may not be sufficient for use in calibration. However, there are scenarios where daily data may be a useful data source, engineering judgement should be used in these cases.

#### Gage Selection Rationale

Table 9 provides an example of rationale for selection of a gage. In this example, the three gages in the Bardwell model unit can be examined. All three of these gages represent a similar area, however, the gage selected as primary included discharge data as well as stage. The gage selected as secondary had a larger drainage area and was therefore prioritized over the tertiary gage. Similar rational was applied across the watershed.

#### Observed Data Connection to Model Element Names

The observed data will be compared to modeled data throughout the project. During the scoping phase, the connection of observed gage locations to the model element names will be included as attributes in the calibration scope geospatial point file. For each gage location HEC-HMS, HEC-ResSim, and HEC-RAS model elements (matching the Name Table) will be included as attributes.

### Calibration Event Selection

Historic storm events to be used for FFRD model calibration will be selected during the Scoping and Data Preparation phase of the FFRD project. Typically, six events are selected. Less events may be selected if data is not available in areas with limited gage record or arid regions with few events.

Calibration events are selected with consideration of the factors listed below in priority order:

1.  Precipitation data availability

<!-- -->

3.  Gage data, or other observed data availability

4.  Spatial coverage throughout basin (precipitation coverage in such a way that the entire model unit experiences a range of flooding)

5.  When considering events such that each portion of the basin experiences at least one flood event, prioritization is given to the largest events of recent record (The largest events with associated high-quality gridded precipitation data)

6.  Type of storm event (representation across all event types applicable to the basin, like snowmelt, rain on snow, tropical storm, etc.)

7.  Consideration is given to similar events within weather generation—a single event instead of a wet season or long series of smaller flood events, when possible

8.  Consideration is given to changes within a watershed that would majorly impact calibration. If possible, events should be selected that best represent the current condition of the basin. Examples of large system changes are long term cyclical weather patterns, construction of a large dam or levee system, significant mining or urbanization, significant changes to a system response due to wildfire or sedimentation.

9.  Seasonality of impactful events

Each model type (i.e., HEC-RAS, HEC-HMS, HEC-ResSim) should use consistent simulation times (start time and end time) for each calibration event. For example, for each calibration event, all hydraulic models should specify identical simulation windows. These simulation windows may vary between model types, but models with dependencies should fully cover the simulation window of the models which depend on them. For example, HEC-HMS simulation window should equal or exceed the HEC-RAS simulation window because HEC-RAS depends on output from HEC-HMS.

#### CALIBRATION EVENT Length—Rainfall

The time window for each selected event will be clearly stated. A rainfall driven calibration event ranges from just prior to start of precipitation and extends through the hydrograph peak at the downstream model unit boundary. Where possible these events should extend 1 to 2 weeks, but up to 30 days is acceptable. HEC-HMS model times may start just before the HEC-RAS models (generally 1 day but could extend further) to address ICs. If a downstream boundary includes a tropical surge, HEC-RAS modeling should start prior to both the surge and rainfall.

#### CALIBRATION EVENT Length—Snowmelt

A snowmelt driven event should start prior to the rising of the flow and extend through to peak of hydrograph at the downstream model unit boundary. If rainfall is a driver of snowmelt, the simulation should start prior to the start of precipitation. Initiating snowmelt may take more than just a single day of warm weather, so the timing of when to start event simulation should take the flow hydrograph into consideration in addition to the start of forcing factors. HEC-HMS model times may start just before the HEC-RAS models (generally 1 day but could extend further) to address these ICs. Snowmelt is typically a slow process; however, a snowmelt flood event is typically associated with a factor that triggers more rapid snowmelt. These events last on the order of one month but may need to extend up to 2 to 3 months to capture the peak of the snowmelt hydrograph and the receding limb. Snowmelt is an annual event, so it can be helpful to model consecutive water years and examine the observed and modeled snow water equivalent (SWE) in a continuous model to understand the snowmelt seasonal patterns and typical snowpack duration.

#### CALIBRATION EVENT Length—Combination Event

A rain-on snow event should range from just prior to start of precipitation and extend through to peak of hydrograph at the downstream model unit boundary. Where possible these events should extend 1 to 2 weeks, but up to 30 days is acceptable. During a rain-on-snow event that occurs during the snowmelt season, prior to precipitation falling there already be an underlying baseflow due to snowmelt occurring in the basin. HEC-HMS model times should start at a point to capture any of these ICs contributing to the overall peak flow. Therefore, it is acceptable if HEC-HMS models start just before the HEC-RAS models (generally 1 day but could extend further) to address these initial conditions. If a downstream boundary includes a tropical surge, HEC-RAS modeling should start prior both the surge and rainfall.
