# Job Aid 2—Data Preparation Processes

## General

The scoping and data preparation phase of an FFRD project includes the preparation of several datasets that will serve as the foundation for model development and production during the subsequent phases of the project. This document details the guidance and workflows for collecting many of the required datasets as listed in Section 4 of SOP Volume II.

Note that other datasets that are not included in this appendix are also prepared during the Scoping and Data Preparation Phase, but they require additional coordination with Hydraulics and Hydrology modeling team members and are described in more detail documents.

### Data Delivery Location and Naming Conventions

All shared data prepared and delivered for FFRD project use is stored in the cloud-based project directory accessible via Model Library according to the standard directory structure. Specific paths for individual datasets are called out throughout this document. Naming conventions (provided in a Job Aid 06) must also be followed.

### Geospatial Data Projection

SOP Volume II discusses the specific parameters associated with the standard projection, which must be adhered to for all geospatial datasets.

### Geospatial Data Formats

The preferred file format for vector data (points, lines, and polygons) is the GeoPackage.

The preferred file format for basin-wide raster data (digital elevation models \[DEMs\], landcover, etc.) is the GeoTIFF.

## Data Manifest

The data manifest is a required deliverable from the Scoping and Data Preparation Phase. It serves as a comprehensive record of all datasets delivered during this phase, including metadata for geospatial files, models, reports, and other data types provided. The data manifest must document all pertinent information about the datasets. The manifest ensures traceability, consistency, and usability of the data for subsequent phases of the project.

Multiple team members contribute to the preparation of data supplied during the Scoping and Data Preparation phase. Therefore, multiple team members must contribute to population of the data manifest. The prepared data can be broadly categorized into three categories: Geospatial data, reference data, and scoping data, which are described below.

1.  **Geospatial Data.** The collection of all official input data to be used as a consistent source for the entire FFRD modeling effort. Many of the datasets are data pulls from centralized nationwide databases that are maintained by others, and represent a static snapshot of the data, clipped to the project study extent to be applied to the FFRD project consistently. This includes the DEM, National Land Cover Database (NLCD), National Hydrography Dataset (NHD), and several other datasets.

2.  **Reference Data.** The collection of all relevant data to be consistently referenced by all efforts for an FFRD project. This includes observed existing models and existing reports among other items.

3.  **Scoping Data.** Datasets that define the scope of the FFRD project. Many of the scoping datasets involve analysis by the technical team to define the scope. This includes the study extent polygon, model unit polygons, mesh development criteria, and calibration event selection among other items.

A template file for the data manifest in available in Appendix C. The following attributes are included in the data manifest.

Table 1. Attributes for Datasets Included in Data Manifest Template

| Attribute | Description |
|----|----|
| Dataset Name | Name of dataset |
| Path | Location of dataset in FFRD repository |
| Description of Content | Content description |
| Category | Category of dataset: Geospatial, Reference Data, Scoping Data, Observed Data, Models, other. |
| Purpose | Purpose of the dataset for FFRD Project Use. Refer to Section 4 of FFRD SOP. |
| Generation Method | Is data direct from source or derived based on the source? |
| Study Type | Applicable for Flood Insurance Rate Map Database (FIRM) Specific datasets: Effective, Base Level Engineering (BLE), BLE Effective |
| Source | Published organization plus any specific data systems within the organization. (e.g., Federal Emergency Management Agency \[FEMA\] Mapping Information Platform \[MIP\], U.S. Geological Survey \[USGS\] Three-Dimensional Hydrography Program \[3DHP\], National Structure Inventory \[NSI\], etc.) |
| Source Type | National, State, Local, Multiple, Other |
| Source Detail | Descriptive text regarding source, such as URL used for access. |
| File size | size of the dataset |
| Currency | Last update date of the dataset provided for FFRD project |
| Geospatial Data Type | Polygon/Point/Polyline/Raster/Image/Not Applicable |

At the end of the scoping and data preparation phase, the data manifest must be delivered to the project location below, and it will be reviewed for accuracy and completeness prior to close-out of the phase.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> data-manifest.xlsx

## FEMA Datasets

Applicable FEMA data for the FFRD modeling efforts include regulatory effective data and BLE data. Various spatial vector data, raster data, and reports are available to download from both publicly available and access-restricted sources. The information in the sections below provide comprehensive listings of available FEMA data and access information. The items listed in Section 4 of SOP Volume II are the minimum required deliverables for the FFRD Scoping and Data Preparation Phase.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> fema

*\*all FEMA data including FIS reports and effective NFIP flood zone polygons.*

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> existing-models

*\*all existing H&H models associated with FEMA efforts*

### Effective Data

Relevant effective data include the FIRM database, Flood Insurance Study (FIS) reports, and Flood Risk Database.

#### Flood Insurance Rate Map Database Geospatial Layers

The FIRM is the official regulatory map of a community on which FEMA has delineated the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHAs) and Base Flood Elevations (BFEs). The effective FIRM data relevant to FFRD modeling efforts include the spatial vector layers and tables noted below.

Metadata, project narratives, and the source citation table may also be available to reference for the sources used in the study and other background information. Effective data issued more than 10 years ago may not have as much detailed data available due to changes in the data, software, tools, and modeling methods used over the years. Most hydraulic data for studies newer than 1995 are based on Hydrologic Engineering Center’s River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) software, but most pre-1995 studies are based on HEC-2 data. Most hydrologic data for studies newer than 1992 are based on HEC’s Hydrologic Modeling System (HEC-HMS) software, but most pre-1992 studies are based on HEC-1 data.

- **Base Flood Elevations**: The S_BFE layer shows the location and attributes for BFE lines and can be used to reference elevations where no effective cross sections are available.

- **Flood Hazard Areas**: The S_Fld_Haz_Ar layer shows the location and attributes for flood risk zones.

- **Gages:** The S_Gage layer is based on hydrologic data and provides the location and attributes for gages in a study area.

- **General Structures**: The S_Gen_Struct layer shows the location and attributes for flood control structures such as dams, culverts, bridges, etc., in the study area.

- **Profile Baselines**: The S_Profil_Basln layer shows the location and attributes for profile baseline and stream centerline features for the Flood Risk Project area.

- **Cross Sections**: The S_XS layer shows the location and attributes for cross section lines for flooding sources. This layer contains all cross sections in a model, not just the lettered cross sections. This layer can be used as a reference for locating relevant cross section data, such as elevation and bathymetric data not captured by LIDAR.

- **Subbasins:** The S_Subbasin layer is based on hydrologic data and provides the extents and attributes for subbasins in the study area.

- **Summary of Discharges**: The L_Summary_Discharges table is based on hydrologic data and provides information about the hydrologic discharge information associated with nodes referenced in the FIS Report Summary of Discharges table. The information on stationing, discharges, and elevations in this table can be used to inform model development and cross-check results.

- **Summary of Elevations**: The L_Summary_Elevations table provides information about SFHAs with static elevations that are referenced in the FIS Report Summary of Elevations table. This table can be used as a reference for cross-checking water surface elevation results.

- **Water Areas**: The S_Wtr_Ar layer shows the location and attributes for hydrography features shown on the FIRM as areas. This layer can be used as a reference for flooding sources not included in the S_Fld_Haz_Ar.

- **Water Lines**: The S_Wtr_Ln layer shows the location and attributes for hydrography features shown on FIRM as lines. This layer can be used as a reference for flooding sources where profile baselines are not available.

#### Flood Insurance Study Reports

The FIS report is a compilation and presentation of flood risk data for specific watercourses, lakes, and coastal flood hazard areas within a community. When a flood study is completed for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), the information and maps are assembled into a FIS. The FIS report contains detailed flood elevation data in flood profiles and data tables, and can be used as a reference for elevation data and FIS background information that may be referenced in developing FFRD hydrologic and hydraulic models.

#### Flood Risk Database

The Flood Risk Database is resource that supplements the flood hazard information on effective FIRMs, FIS, and FIRM database products. This database includes water surface elevation grids, depth grids, and Areas of Mitigation Interest. This database may not be available for all communities.

### Base Level Engineering Data

There are some instances where effective data is not available for a community, but BLE data is available. The BLE process uses the best available data and combines automated techniques with traditional model development to create flood hazard boundaries for the 1-percent-annual-chance event. Flood hazard boundaries are also typically estimated for other recurrence intervals. The results from BLE can be used to produce both regulatory and non-regulatory products. BLE data relevant to the FFRD modeling efforts include HEC-RAS models, vector spatial data, raster data, and a BLE report. More information on the relevant data associated with BLE studies is listed below:

- **Base Flood Elevations**: S_BFE data is available for BLE studies and follows the same requirements as the S_BFE layer listed in the FIRM Database subsection above.

- **Flood Hazard Areas**: S_Flood_Haz_Ar data is available for BLE studies and follows the same requirements as the S_Flood_Haz_Ar layer listed in the FIRM Database subsection above.

- **Water Lines**: The S_Wtr_Ln data is available for BLE studies and follows the same requirements as the S_Wtr_Ln layer listed in the FIRM Database subsection above.

- **HEC-RAS Models**: Hydraulics modeling associated with BLE studies are based on HEC-RAS software and typically include multiple events, including the 1- and 0.2-percent-annual-chance events. Types include both steady-state, one-dimensional (1D) models as well as unsteady, two-dimensional (2D) models.

- **Flood Depth Grids**: These grids are produced as raster data and typically include the 1- and 0.2-percent-annual-chance events. The grids are typically stored in the Flood Risk Database referenced in the Effective Data section above.

- **Water Surface Elevation Grids**: These grids are produced as raster data and typically include the 1- and 0.2-percent-annual-chance events. The grids are typically stored in the Flood Risk Database referenced in the Effective Data section above.

- **BLE Report**: This report provides detailed information on the methodology used for the study.

### Data Gathering Processes

A structured data gathering process is essential to ensure the accuracy, comprehensiveness, and documentation of information available for FFRD modeling efforts. This section outlines the key sources and steps for obtaining relevant effective and BLE data.

#### Sources for FEMA Data

Sources for effective and BLE data from FEMA are listed below:

- **[FEMA Flood Map Service Center](https://msc.fema.gov/portal/advanceSearch) (MSC)**: This is a publicly available source that can be used to obtain effective flood hazard data, including Flood Risk Databases, FIRMs, and FIS reports. Digital effective spatial data is available to download by county or state through the National Flood Hazard Layer (NFHL).

- **[Estimated Base Flood Elevation Viewer](https://webapps.usgs.gov/infrm/estbfe/) (eBFE)**: This is a publicly available source for Region 6 (Arkansas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas) and Region 9 (Arizona, California, and Nevada) that can be used to review which Hydrologic Unit Codes (HUCs) are located within the area of interest and to download available BLE data. Data is not available for other regions.

- **Mapping Information Platform**: This source requires access to the Risk Analysis and Management (RAM) Access Portal (RAP). The Flood Risk Study Engineering Library (FRiSEL) and MIP File Explorer can be used to obtain hydrologic and hydraulics data.

- **FileTrail**: This source requires access to the RAP. It can be used to request data for studies too large to download from the MIP.

#### Process to Obtain Data

By leveraging the available tools and platforms above, users can efficiently collect and validate the necessary datasets. The following subsections provide a comprehensive guide to accessing and utilizing these resources effectively.

While the MSC and eBFE Viewers are valuable resources for effective and BLE data, ensuring an individual with MIP access is involved in the data gathering process can significantly enhance the data available to use. MIP users benefit from advanced search tools and broader data access, which can help overcome the limitations faced by non-MIP users. MIP users have access to a broader range of hydrologic and hydraulic data, including detailed datasets that may not be available through public sources, such as the MSC or eBFE Viewer.

##### Mapping Information Platform and Flood Risk Study Engineering Library

1.  Use key words, such as the subbasin, watershed, or county name to search for hydraulics data using FRiSEL on the MIP to get an initial idea of what may be available for the area in question.

2.  Use Geographic Information System (GIS) software to determine which counties intersect the watershed or subbasin for your area of interest.

3.  Search FRiSEL using the Advanced Search to search by state, county, or community to determine availability of hydrologic and hydraulics data.

4.  For data too large to download from FRiSEL, use File Explorer in the MIP to download hydrologic or hydraulics data in smaller portions where possible.

5.  For remaining data too large to download from FRiSEL or File Explorer in the MIP, request data from FileTrail.

##### Map Service Center and Estimated Base Flood Elevation Viewer

1.  To obtain data from the MSC, use the MSC Search All Products feature to search by county or community to locate any effective data available for the area in question. If you search for effective NFHL data by state, you may search for any community in the state.

2.  To obtain data from the eBFE Viewer, select whether your area of interest is in FEMA Region 6 or Region 9 on the homepage. On the next window that appears, select the *I Want to Download* option. Then select the watershed(s) that note data is available to download available datasets and models.

## Acquisition of Core Geospatial Datasets

### Digital Elevation Model

The requirements for the project DEM are provided in the main body of the SOP. The delivery location for the DEM is shown below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> terrain-base

*\*note full resolution and 100-foot versions are posted to same directory*

#### Source Data Search

The primary source for DEMs in the United Statis is the USGS 3DEP program, where the best available data can be accessed from the [National Map](https://apps.nationalmap.gov/downloader/).

A search for other local data sources that may provide higher quality DEM data should also be investigated. For example, many states maintain DEM data, as demonstrated in the following examples:

- Connecticut: <https://cteco.uconn.edu/data/download/flight2016/index.htm>

- Illinois: <https://clearinghouse.isgs.illinois.edu/data/elevation/illinois-height-modernization-ilhmp>

- Kentucky: <https://kyfromabove.ky.gov/maps/kygeonet::kentucky-elevation-data-dem-and-dem-tile-index>

- Massachusetts: <https://maps.massgis.digital.mass.gov/MassMapper/MassMapper.html>

- New Hampshire: <https://lidar.unh.edu/map/>

- North Carolina: <https://sdd.nc.gov/>

- Ohio: <https://gis1.oit.ohio.gov/geodatadownload/>

- West Virginia: <https://data.wvgis.wvu.edu/elevation/>

#### Tips

The following considerations and tips are intended to aid in DEM acquisition and preparation for the FFRD project.

##### Snapping/Edge Matching

As described in SOP Volume II, the origin of the base DEM and all derivative grid products must be consistent and any lower resolution products must be based on an integer multiple of the full resolution base DEM. The reference origin is shown in SOP Volume II.

Methods for meeting this standard vary, but the cell size and origin coordinate of any raster can be checked with GIS software using the following GDAL command:

\$ gdalinfo your-dem.tif \| grep -E "Origin\|Pixel Size"

##### Interpolation Method

When reprojecting or resampling to a lower resolution, DEMs should be processed using bilinear interpolation when reprojecting or resampling to a lower resolution.

##### Tiling

Tiled GEOTiffs can be preferable to a single, merged, high-resolution DEM for the entire study basin due to file size challenges associated with transferring and consuming the data. Hydraulic modeling software accepts \*.vrt files that are capable of compiling tiled GeoTIFFs.

##### Download and processing scripts

Processing of data to produce DEMs for FFRD use will typically be aided by scripts that have been thoroughly reviewed, and several open-source tools may be available to support this effort. A draft python script is provided in Appendix F that downloads high-resolution DEM data from the USGS source, converts elevation values to feet, projects to FFRD standard, and tiles the final data to less than 1 GB blocks stacked according to a .vrt file. Instructions and a sample shapefile to test the tool are included. Application of any scripts for FFRD DEM creation must be reviewed to ensure SOP requirements are met.

##### <u>Metadata</u>

Metadata associated with the source DEMs should be retained, including metadata that clearly identifies all original sources of the final project DEM and their spatial extent.

### Elevation Derived Hydrography

Elevation derived hydrography (EDH) refers to geospatial layers that represent water features—including streams, rivers, shorelines, and catchments—directly from high-resolution elevation data. These layers ensure a consistent, topographically accurate hydrography dataset that aligns with terrain representation.

In the context of FFRD, EDH:

- Replaces or enhances traditional hydrography datasets that may be outdated or misaligned with modern elevation surfaces.

- Improves spatial accuracy of flow paths and watershed boundaries, which is important for modeling surface water movement and flood behavior.

- Provides an authoritative hydrographic base layer for hydraulic modeling and floodplain mapping efforts.

  If available, [USGS 3DHP](https://www.usgs.gov/3d-hydrography-program) data is downloaded and used directly. Where 3DHP data is not available, EDH data is produced as part of the data preparation effort for the FFRD project. This centerline data is provided in two versions: short reaches that include attributes such as drainage area, and longer reaches un-attributed segments.

  Efforts to align with USGS 3DHP program priorities for data development should be made.

Various GIS tools are available to support development of EDH, such as [Esri’s Arc Hydro](https://www.esri.com/en-us/industries/water-resources/arc-hydro) toolbox. Edits are commonly necessary at breaks in the channel flowline, such as roadway culvert crossings, where the stream may not align correctly between the upstream and downstream channels.

All identified streams with a drainage area of greater than 0.25 square miles should be included in the EDH delivery for FFRD.

The EDH layers provided will be formatted in GeoPackage format and delivered to the location below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> elevation-derived-hydrography

### National Hydrography Dataset and Watershed Boundary Dataset

The legacy National Hydrography Dataset Plus High Resolution (NHDPlus HR) and Watershed Boundary Datasets (WBD) are available for download by Hydrologic Unit 4-digit or 8-digit identifiers (HU4/HU8), by state, or nationally at the below link:

> <https://www.usgs.gov/national-hydrography/access-national-hydrography-products>

The NHDPlus HR was processed using 10-meter 3D Elevation Program (3DEP) data. The dataset was initially released between 2018 and 2021 as reprocessed for certain regions in 2022 and 2023.

The WBD and WBD layers provided will be formatted in GeoPackage format and delivered to the locations below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> nhd

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> wbd

### Vertical Datum Conversions

An official listing of vertical datum conversions for point locations at critical sites throughout the basin will be established and documented during the Scoping and Data Preparation Phase. Conversion values must be included for all stream gages and infrastructure dam locations that are needed to adjusted water surface elevations records or as-built dam elevation data to the vertical datum used for modeling. The source of the conversion values will be documented in the table.

Conversion of any gridded data such as surveyed bathymetry that is no specific XY point location should also described with a table entry.

When available, conversion values should be directly linked to official USGS stream gage reported values, from adopted values from dam operators or any sources that have been previously adopted by others.

When no previous conversion values are available, [NOAA Vertical Datum Transformation](https://vdatum.noaa.gov/) tool is recommended.

A template for the listing of conversions is provided in Appendix F, and the completed table will be delivered to the following location.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> vertical-datum-conversions

### National Land Cover Database

NLCD is used as the minimum standard to aid in the parameterization of roughness coefficients, specifically Manning's “n” values, and percent impervious areas, which are crucial for simulating surface flow.

Data can be downloaded through the [Multi-Resolution Land Characteristics Consortium (MRLC) website](https://www.mrlc.gov/). Annual data dating to 1985 is available at a 30-meter resolution. This data must be reprojected to the FFRD projection, clipped to the buffered study area, and provided in GeoTIFF format.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> land-cover

### Supplemental Land Cover Datasets

Optionally, additional land cover datasets may improve the ability to calibrate the FFRD models. The [NOAA Coastal Change Analysis Program (C-CAP) Land Cover Atlas](https://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast/tools/lca.html) is available. Aerial Imagery may be processed with advanced techniques to directly support modeling efforts we well.

If these optional supplemental datasets are scoped for inclusion and coordinated with the leadership team for specific projects, they would be stored in the following project directory location.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> land-cover

### Soil Coverage

The [Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil Survey Geographic Database (SSURGO)](https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/resources/data-and-reports/soil-survey-geographic-database-ssurgo) provides delineations of soils information in shapefile format to which other attributes can be joined. Soil textures or hydrologic soil groups can be used for hydrologic model parameterization.

This dataset will be processed for the study basin and delivered to the following location.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> soils

### Bathymetric Data

A full search for available bathymetric data to supplement the above-water terrain information for the study basin is conducted during the Scoping and Data Preparation Phase. The availability, type, and format will vary across individual study basins and across the nation. The table below provides common sources of data that may be used to support the FFRD study, but it is not intended to be comprehensive. Judgement and coordination with the larger PDT will be required to determine whether certain available datasets will provide value to the project and if their acquisition is warranted.

Table 2. Non-comprehensive FFRD Data Source List

| Source | Data and Information Link | Description |
|----|----|----|
| USACE Hydrographic Surveys Program | [Link](https://navigation.usace.army.mil/Survey/Hydro/) | includes links to the USACE Hydrographic Surveys interactive map and downloadable data, the National Channel Framework Dataset, and the Joint Airborne Lidar Bathymetric Technical Center of Expertise. |
| NOAA Bathymetry | [Link](https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/maps/bathymetry/) | includes links to various interactive maps and bathymetry products as well as resources for creating gridded data. Interactive maps include the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) Bathymetric Data Viewer and the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) Data Centre for Digital Bathymetry Viewer (DCDB). Other products include Coastal Elevation Models, Estuarine Bathymetric Digital Elevation Models, Great Lakes Bathymetry, and other bathymetry projects. |
| Reservoir Sediment Surveys or Tabulated Storage-Elevation Data | N/A | Owners or operators of large reservoirs may have an estimate of storage for a range of pool elevations may regularly monitor changes in available storage with surveys. |
| USGS Inland Bathymetry | [Link](https://www.usgs.gov/3d-elevation-program/inland-bathymetry) | Inland bathymetry is a component of USGS 3D National Topography Model (3DNTM) and the next generation of the 3D Elevation Program (3DEP), where our goal is to map all the topography of the nation, including submerged topography under lakes, rivers, and reservoirs, using airborne topobathymetric LIDAR (green wavelength lidar). |
| USGS Maps of America’s Submerged Lands | [Link](https://woodshole.er.usgs.gov/data/submergedlands/) | Compilation of USGS published bathymetric information for select locations |
| Northeast Ocean Data | [Link](https://www.northeastoceandata.org/) | Library of information along the coast and great lakes with a focus on the northeastern united states |
| Existing Hydraulic Model Cross Sections | N/A | Legacy hydraulic models may retain valuable cross-section field survey data not preserved in other formats. Integrating this data into current models may be considered, provided its quality and significance warrant the effort associated with its extraction. |
| Recreational Maps | N/A | Various sources of recreational maps provide bathymetric information, particularly in lakes. |

Generally, the data collected should be provided in its original format, which may include point data, raster data, surveyed river cross sections, contour line data, or other formats. Certain formats should be prepared for FFRD use ensuring the location is represented in a geospatial format that adheres to the FFRD projection and vertical datum standards. Key metadata of each dataset should be maintained with the dataset and included in the data manifest.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> bathymetry

### National Levee Database (NLD)

A copy of the NLD geospatial data is placed in the FFRD project directory. A data refinement effort for the NLD should be completed prior to the start of the FFRD project and documentation of that effort is also included as a deliverable.

The layers delivered will include system alignment lines, system routes, centerlines, floodwalls lines, closure lines, and point feature data.

Additionally, an XYZM table based on the system route will be produced that captures the XY locations, levee system stationing, and elevation. The XYZM table will apply the FFRD projection, units, and vertical datum standards.

The delivery of NLD datasets is automatable, and the use of scripts to produce the required deliverables in encouraged.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> levees \> nld

### National Inventory of Dams

A copy of the National Inventory of Dams (NID) attributed point data is placed in the FFRD project directory. A data refinement effort for the NID should be completed prior to the start of the FFRD project and documentation of that effort is also included as a deliverable.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> dams \> nid

### National Structure Inventory

The NSI is a comprehensive system of databases managed by USACE. The main purpose of the NSI is to provide a detailed inventory of structures across the United States. This data is crucial for various applications, including flood risk management, emergency response, and infrastructure planning. The NSI databases contain structure inventories of varying quality and spatial coverage. The first version was published in 2011 and has since been updated in 2016, 2019, and 2022.

NSI data is comprehensive and includes information on the location, type, and characteristics of structures. This data is essential for detailed risk assessments and planning. The NSI provides extensive documentation, including technical references and user guides, to help users understand and utilize the data effectively. The NSI data is accessible through various platforms, allowing users to integrate it into their GIS and analysis workflows. [An interactive map](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/nsi/userguides/download-tool) supports identification and download of available data.

The [NSI API](https://nsi.sec.usace.army.mil/nsiapi/) provides access to the NSI structures through query by polygon, bounding box, or Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) code. This allows a user to fetch structures in multiple formats, programmatically, to support a variety of workflows.

The naming convention from Job Aid 06, *Standard Naming Conventions,* must be followed, and additional details regarding interaction with the NSI data is provided in Job Aid 17, *Consequence Processes*.

**<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> structure-inventory**

### Stream Gage Network

Stream gage data is foundational for calibration of model parameters and validation of results. The USGS stream gage network typically serves as the primary source, although other stream gage networks may be available depending on location.

Separate instructions describe the acquisition of the gage data and the scoping of the use of data at gages for model calibration.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> stream-gages

### National Bridge Inventory

The National Bridge Inventory includes a shapefile of roadway bridges, including attributes which may be referenced for development of hydraulic model inputs. Background information and a coding guide are available through the [U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration Bridges and Structures website](https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/nbi.cfm). [An interactive map](https://geodata.bts.gov/datasets/usdot::national-bridge-inventory/explore) supports identification and download of available data.

Bridge attributes relevant to hydraulic modeling to retain include:

- Road Name

- Year Built

- Deck Width

- Skew

- Span Type, Number, Length

- Structure Type (Culvert, Bridge, etc.)

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> transportation

### National Railroad Bridges

The National Bridge Inventory does not include railroad bridges. However, the Federal Railroad Administration’s Bridge Inventory can be used as a supplement. Its [data dictionary and links to an interactive map](https://resilience.bts.gov/pages/data-bridge-inventory) are available.

Attributes relevant to hydraulic modeling to regain include:

- Owner

- Name and ID

- Number of tracks

- Storage Location: *model-library \> ffrd-repository \> basin-data \> transportation* folder

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> transportation

### U.S. Census Urban Areas

The U.S. Census Urban Area polygons are leveraged directly for certain aspects of scoping the FFRD study. A raw copy of the polygons are placed in the project directory. The data can be acquired at <https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-line-file.html>.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> census \> urban-areas

### U.S. Census Incorporated Place Boundaries, Road and Railroad Data

Incorporated place boundaries, roads and railroad data can be a useful reference layers. The data can be acquired at <https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-line-file.html>.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> census

## Risk Assessment Studies

A search for dam and levee risk assessment data will be conducted. Common sources will include USACE, Bureau of Reclamation, and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission risk assessments. For FFRD projects, the USACE Dam and Levee leads will be responsible for assembling the existing risk assessment datasets. Collected reports should be posted to the locations below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> risk-data

## Physical Structure and Operation Information—Dams and Levees

Physical structure and operation information for dams and levees are key inputs into the scoping and modeling efforts for an FFRD study. These datasets include operations manuals, as-built drawings, and reservoir storage data among other information. Additional details specifying the procedures for searching for and acquiring the data are currently being developed and will be elaborated in a future version of this document.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> dams

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> levees

## Acquisition of Other Existing Models

A full search for additional existing hydraulics and hydrologic models will be conducted. Acquisition of models associated with the FEMA NFIP is described separately. Other common sources of available models include USACE Corps Water Management System (CWMS) models, local flood risk reduction feasibility study models, and dam breach models among others. Not all models serve as direct inputs into the FFRD project, but they are a useful reference. Judgement may be required to ascertain if model datasets are worth the effort to acquire.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> existing-models

## Local Data

Various other existing datasets may add value to the FFRD process, such as those that are brought forth during stakeholder engagement activities. Judgement will be required to incorporate certain datasets into the project directory. When data is supplied that does not fit in the categories provided, they may be posted to the directory below.

<u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> other

**--**
