# Job Aid 5—Observed Gridded Data Preparation

This document describes the processes to develop the authoritative set of observed gridded data for the study basin for use in an FFRD project. This data is collected, processed, quality control (QC) checked, and delivered to the project directory during the Scoping and Data Preparation Phase of the FFRD project.

## Tools available

Data tools for processing the gridded datasets include the following:

- HEC Vortex

- HEC-DSSVue

- HEC-SSP

- QGIS or ArcGIS Pro

## Data to be Delivered

The observed gridded datasets in the following subsections are to be prepared for the FFRD project. These datasets include available observed gridded data that occurred over the study basin (which is separate from gridded storm catalog data for the larger region, developed separately). The spatial extent of these datasets should be buffered beyond the study basin extent to ensure no data is missing along the edge of the boundary and that the data can accommodate slight adjustments to the study basin boundary if they occur later in the project.

> <u>Delivery Location</u>: basin-name \> basin-data \> observed-data

### Period of Record for Study Basin Extent

Gridded datasets for the full continuous period of record (POR) of precipitation, temperature, and snow are acquired, adjusted, and delivered to the project directory in DSS format.

Processes for acquisition and considerations for adjustments and QC of the data sets are outlined in sections below.

### Historic Calibration Events

Gridded precipitation, temperature, and snow datasets clipped to the historic event time windows are clipped from the POR data for use in model event-based calibration efforts and delivered to the project directory in DSS format.

The time windows for the events will be defined according to the guidance for calibration event selection provided in Job Aid 01, *Scoping Processes.* Observed gridded datasets should be buffered both before and after the selected events by at least 1 week. For example, if an historic event is expected to span 15 January 1996 through 15 February 1996, create DSS files containing gridded precipitation, temperature, and snow data that spans 01 January 1996 through 28 February 1996 (i.e., buffered in time by a little bit to avoid reprocessing if the event window is changed).

### Observed Precipitation Annual Maximum Series

During the scoping and data preparation phase of the project, annual maximum series (AMS) of observed sub-basin averaged precipitation will be created and delivered. The precipitation AMS will be created based on the final gridded dataset after all QC and normalization adjustments.

Using the uncalibrated HEC-HMS model and the POR precipitation data, a precipitation-only period simulation can provide the data to extract the AMS. All hydrologic processes are turned off in the model, except for discretization. AMS for subbasin average, observed precipitation for 1-hour, 24-hour, and 72-hour increments will be calculated and extracted in HEC-DSSVue for the POR simulation. Results will be plotted and assessed for possible input data problems. Reference the [Generating Subbasin Averaged Precipitation AMS With HEC-HMS Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/spaces/WG/pages/294954861/Generating+Subbasin+Averaged+Precipitation+AMS+With+HEC-HMS) for guidance on this process.

### Observed Snow Water Equivalent Annual Maximum Series

During the scoping and data preparation phase of the project, the AMS of observed sub-basin averaged snow water equivalent (SWE) will be created and delivered. The SWE AMS will be created based on the final gridded dataset after all QC and normalization adjustments.

Extract subbasin-averaged time series using the Grid-to-Point tool within the HEC-Vortex utility in HEC-HMS. Reference the [Grid to Point Converter Tutorial](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsguides/gridded-boundary-condition-data/downloading-importing-and-processing-gridded-data/task-2-extracting-time-series-data-from-grids) for guidance on this process. This should be done separately for both Analysis of Record for Calibration (AORC) and Parameter-elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model (PRISM) gridded precipitation datasets as the comparison of the two can be a helpful resource during the QC process. The Mean statistic should be selected to get a single observed value averaged over the spatial domain of each subbasin.

With the hourly and/or daily subbasin-averaged time series, compute the n-day duration precipitation accumulations time series (e.g., 1-, 2-, and 3-day durations) using either HEC-SSP or HEC-DSSVue. Reference the [Data Filtering, Extracting an n-Day Duration Time Series Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/sspdocs/sspexamples/2.3/data-filtering-examples/data-filtering-extracting-an-n-day-duration-time-series) for guidance on this process. Finally, compute an AMS of precipitation and SWE using either HEC-SSP or HEC-DSSVue. The deliverables from this process are separate DSS files for each dataset containing the subbasin-averaged precipitation and SWE AMS to provide to the HEC-HMS modeler(s).

### Observed Liquid Water at Soil Surface Annual Maximum Series

During the calibration phase of the FFRD project after the POR HEC-HMS model has been calibrated and complete, the observed AMS of observed sub-basin averaged liquid water at the soil surface (LWASS) will be created and delivered.

The Grid-to-Point tool within the HEC-Vortex utility in HEC-HMS is used to extract the subbasin average time series of LWASS from the POR simulation results. Reference the [Grid to Point Converter Tutorial](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsguides/gridded-boundary-condition-data/downloading-importing-and-processing-gridded-data/task-2-extracting-time-series-data-from-grids) for guidance on this process. The Mean statistic should be selected to get a single observed value averaged over the spatial domain of each subbasin.

With the hourly subbasin-averaged time-series, compute the n-day duration LWASS accumulations time series (e.g., 1-, 2-, and 3-day durations) using either HEC-SSP or HEC-DSSVue. Reference the [Data Filtering, Extracting an n-Day Duration Time Series Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/sspdocs/sspexamples/2.3/data-filtering-examples/data-filtering-extracting-an-n-day-duration-time-series) for guidance on this process. Finally, compute an AMS of LWASS using either HEC-SSP or HEC-DSSVue. Reference the [Data Filtering, Extracting an Annual Maximum Series Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/sspdocs/sspexamples/2.3/data-filtering-examples/data-filtering-extracting-an-annual-maximum-series) for guidance on this process.

## Spatial Projection and Naming Conventions

The spatial projection and naming conventions for these datasets must conform to the standards described in other sections of the FFRD SOP.

## Data Sources

The primary source for short-interval gridded precipitation and air temperature is the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) AORC dataset. The AORC dataset contains one-hour accumulated surface precipitation and the temperature data is comprised of instantaneous 2-meter above ground air temperature. Both precipitation and air temperature are reported at the top of the hour.

Another source for gridded precipitation data is the Oregan State University PRISM dataset. This includes daily, monthly, and long-term averages for precipitation and is typically used if data normalization is deemed necessary.

SWE data is available from the University of Arizona and is based on assimilated Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) and PRISM data.

## Raw Gridded Data Acquisition

Gridded datasets are imported and converted to a DSS file using HEC-Vortex utility. Raw datasets should be clipped to the buffered modeling domain during the import process. This creates a DSS file containing gridded precipitation, temperature, and snow data for 1979 through the present. This set of files will be used within the HEC-HMS POR simulations as well as Stochastic Storm Transposition (SST) processing. An overview of the this process is provided in the [Gridded Data Import Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsum/4.13/utilities/gridded-data-import).

All available datasets should be acquired as inputs the assessment of the need for normalization described in sections below. Only the recommended final (adjusted as needed) gridded datasets for use as observed data for the FFRD project are required for delivery to the shared project directory.

## Normalization of Gridded Precipitation Data for Study basin

The need for normalization of raw observed gridded precipitation data over the study must be assessed. If large discrepancies in precipitation volumes between datasets exist, normalization may be required.

To assess the need for normalization, the difference in total mass of precipitation over the POR for the AORC and PRISM datasets are compared. If a large total volume of precipitation difference exists, the AORC data should be normalized based on PRISIM dataset. A 50 percent volume difference can be used as a guideline to trigger a need to normalize the data.

### Compute Mass of Precipitation

For AORC and PRISM datasets, extract subbasin-averaged time series using the Grid-to-Point tool within the HEC-Vortex utility in HEC-HMS. Reference the [Grid to Point Converter Tutorial](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsguides/gridded-boundary-condition-data/downloading-importing-and-processing-gridded-data/task-2-extracting-time-series-data-from-grids) for guidance on this process. The Mean statistic should be selected to get a single observed value averaged over the spatial domain of each subbasin. Using the Tools \| Math Functions \| Accumulation Operator in HEC-DSSVue, create accumulated mass curves for each of the precipitation time-series datasets that were extracted for each subbasin.

### Normalization of Precipitation Data

When the criteria for normalization of the observed data is met, proceed with normalizing the POR AORC dataset to correct the volume so that it aligns with the PRISM dataset. Note the time-window and normalization interval to best target the sections of the dataset with suspected data inaccuracies. Reference the [Normalizing Precipitation Data Tutorial](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsguides/gridded-boundary-condition-data/downloading-importing-and-processing-gridded-data/task-3-normalizing-precipitation-data) for guidance on this process. Produce a new DSS file containing normalized AORC precipitation dataset and provide to the HEC-HMS modeler(s).

Because the boundary condition data is the basis for future SST modeling, any normalization of precipitation data would be needed for the observed data in the study basin but also across the entire SST domain for consistency and the storm catalog from the transposition region for the FFRD study must also be normalized (discussed in other areas of the SOP).

## Quality Control

QC is an important step before beginning the modeling for both historic event simulation and POR simulations. The gridded datasets should be inspected for errors including but not limited to holes in the grids, missing time steps, far outlying values, time-shifted data, and mismatched values and units. The quality checks safeguard against missing or erroneous data use in the model calibration process. Quality checks also prevent potentially time-consuming model simulation errors caused by erroneous meteorologic data.

Use the Image-Exporter tool in the HEC-Vortex utility to convert a DSS record into a \*.tiff raster that can be inspected in QGIS or ArcGIS Pro to check for missing data. Next, the HEC-Vortex Sanitizer tool can be used to explicitly address missing data, screen for minimum/maximum values, and fix DSS part names, amongst others. If there is a shift needed with the time and date of gridded records or a discrepancy in the start time (Part D) or end time (Part E) of a record, the HEC-Vortex Time-Shifter tool can be used to make adjustments to the time of records. For unit conversions, the HEC-Vortex Calculator tool can perform simple operations on all records in the DSS file. Reference the [HEC-Vortex Utility Guide](https://www.hec.usace.army.mil/confluence/hmsdocs/hmsum/4.13/utilities) for additional details and guidance on each of these tools.
