# Job Aid 10—Dam System Response Development

This job aid describes the procedures for collecting dam performance data, scoping of the dam breach modeling methodology, producing system response inputs, and communication with the team to incorporate dam breaches into the modeling system.

## Context

To incorporate dam performance into FFRD, dams where the evaluation of breaches may have a significant impact on flood risk characterization must be identified, a system response curve must be estimated, and a breach scenario must be incorporated into the hydraulics and hydrologic models and cloud-compute inputs.

## Roles

The following key roles are required to incorporate dam breaches into an FFRD project:

### Dam Data Lead

The dam data lead is the USACE expert responsible for the development and delivery of system response probability (SRP) curves for dams. They also contribute to dam database refinement efforts and the scoping of dams for breach assessment in the FFRD model. Additionally, they review and evaluate breach results from stochastic model simulations.

### Hydraulic Modeler

The hydraulic modeler is responsible for developing the model that fully accommodates dam breaches as scoped.

### Reservoir Operations Modeler

The reservoir operations modeler is responsible for ensuring that the operations model accounts for breach events that may occur for reservoirs included in the reservoir operations model in by adjusting to appropriate post-breach operations releases.

### Cloud Compute Lead

The cloud compute lead incorporates hydraulic and hydrologic models and SRP relationships into cloud compute for the project and ensures that results are shared with the team for review.

## Procedural Overview

The following key tasks are performed to establish the required model elements, breach locations, and system response curves for FFRD dam breach modeling:

1.  <u>Prior to an FFRD Study</u>: An effort to systematically refine and improve the quality of the National Inventory of Dams database within the basin is performed prior to the FFRD project. Guidelines for these separate efforts are not included in this SOP.

2.  <u>Scoping and Data Preparation Phase</u>:

<!-- -->

1.  Ensure the adequacy of National Inventory of Dams data to support scoping of model approach for dams, including the selection of subset of dams to consider for breaching. FFRD project specific assumptions may be necessary to support the study and will be documented in FFRD reporting and available as feedback to the NID data managers.

2.  Select dams within the study that will be considered for breach assessment and document the selection within the Dam Model Scoping Table. Criteria for selection of dams to breach is included in Job Aid 01, *Scoping Processes*.

3.  Consolidate all existing risk assessment data for dams scoped for breach.

<!-- -->

3.  <u>Calibration Phase</u>:

<!-- -->

1.  Develop SRP curves for each dam included in the scope for breach. Development of dam SRP curves for the basin may include a combination of the sources as described in sections below.

<!-- -->

4.  Establish crest elevation and toe elevation for each breach to be applied in SRP curves and hydraulic modeling.

5.  Upload SRP curve data to Model Library in established directory location and format for incorporation into cloud compute.

6.  Develop hydraulic and hydrologic models to accommodate sampled breach elevations during the conformance phase. This includes aspects of HEC-RAS modeling and HEC-ResSim modeling.

<!-- -->

4.  <u>Conformance Phase</u>: Review and evaluate resulting sampled breach elevations and number of breach events that occur within the single realization conformance phase computation. Address any issues.

5.  <u>Production Phase</u>: Review and evaluate breach results from multi-realization event computations.

6.  <u>Final Reporting Phase</u>: Ensure proper documentation of breach inputs and results. Note that interim reporting is integrated into each FFRD project phase, and the end-of-phase reports will provide much of the technical documentation of dam breach inputs and results.

## Dam Breach Site Selection

Dam breaches for FFRD should be consolidated into a single representative breach location, which is generally considered adequate for flood risk characterization at basin scale.

Unique dam configurations or other circumstances may warrant a more complex treatment of certain dams, which must be coordinated with the full project team.

## Intervention

Intervention, sometimes referred as flood fighting, will be accounted for in the system response probabilities resulting in lower probabilities of breach.

## Consolidation of Existing Risk Assessment Information

During the scoping and data preparation phase of the FFRD project, the dam data lead is responsible for collecting all existing dam risk assessment information.

## System Response Probability Curve Development for Dams

An SRP curve will be provided for all dams scoped for inclusion in the FFRD study. It is recognized that relatively limited data exist to support SRPs estimates. The sections below provide guidance for SRP development based on type of input data available.

### Dams with Existing Quantitative Risk Assessment Study

Dams with a current existing Quantitative Risk Assessment (QRA) will leverage the performance data directly. FFRD models typically include a single representative breach location and SRP for all potential failure modes, so consolidation of the existing data may be necessary.

### Dams with Existing Semi-Quantitative Risk Assessment Study

Dams with a current existing Semi-Quantitative Risk Assessment (SQRA) will leverage the performance data directly. FFRD models typically include a single representative breach location and SRP for all potential failure modes, so consolidation of the existing data may be necessary.

### Dams with other Existing Risk Assessment or Performance Information

Other risk assessment or performance evaluation other than those described in the sections above should be evaluated on a case-by-case basis for the relevance of the existing data for FFRD modeling. When applicable, this existing information may be leveraged for FFRD SRP development.

### Dams with Existing Dams Screening Tool Risk Screening

Performance assessments from finalized and approved Dam Screening Tool (DST) based risk screenings should be leveraged directly for FFRD SRP curves. FFRD models typically include a single representative breach location and SRP curve for all potential failure modes, so consolidation of the existing data may be necessary.

### Dams with No Existing Study

Most dams in the United States do not currently have existing risk assessment studies to support SRP curve development for FFRD purposes. Additionally, no generalized, widely accepted default approach for approximate default performance of dams exists. For these dams, the two options described below will be applied at the judgement of the dam data lead for the FFRD project in coordination with the technical lead and project manager for the study. The time and cost to leverage more sophisticated approaches should be considered and weighed against other constraints.

#### Rapid System Response Probability Assessment with Dam Safety Tool Approaches

A rapid SRP assessment leveraging existing physical dam data based on methods documented within the DST may be applied for FFRD use. When applied, the Dam Data Lead is responsible for review and vetting the results.

#### Simplistic System Response Probability Approach

A simplistic SRP based on step-function primarily driven by overtopping of the dam may be applied for FFRD use. This approach typically would include a 0 percent probability of breach for all loadings below a overtopping depth threshold (such as 2 feet) and a 100 percent probability of breach for any loading over the selected threshold.

## Hydraulic Model Breach Parameters

Guidance for selection of breach parameters for FFRD are included in SOP Volume II, Section 8.

## Review Evaluation of Breach Results

A single realization of stochastic events is simulated by cloud compute during the Conformance Phase. Breach results from the Conformance Phase must be reviewed by the dam data lead to ensure that breach trigger elevations are being sampled appropriately and the number of breach events that occur at each breach location falls within the expected range. Similarly, the multi-realization results from the projection phase must be reviewed and evaluated.
