# Job Aid 16—Event Selection for Hydraulic Modeling

The process below aims to develop a list of specific events that may drive annual maximum hazards based on hydrologic, reservoir operations, and system response modeling results. This selected subset of events is then computed through the hydraulic models which provide the modeled hazard information necessary to produce annual hazard and risk probability outputs.

Summary files that tabulate the maximums of many variables in many locations for each event are generated. Using the event maximum summary data, a list of annual maximum contributing events is generated.

## Events Based on Hydrolgy and Reservoir Operations Model Results

Using summarized hydrology and reservoir operations event maximum outputs, apply the following steps to generate the list of annual maximum contributing events.

1.  Read hydrology and reservoir operations summarized output event maximums following guidelines in [Table 1](#_Ref216775483).

<!-- -->

3.  Read the blocks.json file containing the relationship of each event number to a synthetic year.

4.  Iterate over each synthetic year, over each parameter and location.

<!-- -->

1.  Find the maximum value within the synthetic year.

2.  Store the event number and maximum value with the parameter and location.

<!-- -->

5.  Iterate over the stored maximums and event numbers for each parameter and location.

<!-- -->

1.  Sort each parameter and location based on maximum value.

<!-- -->

3.  Select the events within the target recurrence interval range. (For FFRD, this is 1/10 and 1/2,000.)

4.  Store the event numbers for those selected events.

## Events based on possible breach event

The following steps identify events that may result in breaching, which could lead to annual maximum contributing events behind levees or downstream of dams.

1.  Develop a rating curve relationship to estimate water surface loading at each specific breach location based on the most appropriate correlated output parameter from either they hydrology model or the reservoir operations model.

    1.  Hydraulic model results from events identified in Section 1.1 are needed to support the development of these rating curves during the conformance phase of the project. For the production phase of the project, the previously established rating curves can be used directly.

<!-- -->

6.  Generate estimated water surface loading at each breach location for each event using the relationship from Step 1 and output summaries from other models.

7.  Read the event level maximum files breach trigger elevations containing event maximums following guidelines in [Table 1](#_Ref216775483).

8.  Utilize the relationship developed in Step 1 and compare the breach trigger elevation at each breach location to determine if a breach may occur. If a breach may occur at any location, record the event number.

9.  Store all identified event numbers that may include a breach of any structure

<span id="_Ref216775483" class="anchor"></span>Table 1. Key Parameters and Locations Identifying Annual Maximum Contributing Events

| Parameter | Location | Model |
|----|----|----|
| Instantaneous Excess Precipitation | All subbasins | Hydrology |
| Flow (Instantaneous) | Subbasin outlets, reaches, and/or junction elements at primary gages | Hydrology |
| Flow (Regulated - Instantaneous) | At primary, secondary, and tertiary gages and reservoir outflows | Reservoir operations |
| Pool Elevation | At all dams with system response curves | Reservoir operations |
| Breach Trigger Elevations | At all dams and levees with system response curves | System response |

## Final Event List

After events are identified for hydrology, reservoir operations, and breaching, deconflict lists ensuring event numbers are only identified once.
